Magnetic storage Magnetic storage devices store data by magnetizing particles on a disk or tape.
A floppy disk is so called because it consists of a flexible sheet of plastic, coated with iron oxide- a magnetizable material. A floppy disk drive spins at 360 revolutions per minute (rpm), so it's relatively slow. However, a hard drive spins at over 7,200 rpm and stores data on a stack of metal rotating disks called platters. This means you can store much more data and retrieve information much faster.
New disks need to be formatted before you can use them, unless they come preformatted from the manufacturer. When the disk is formatted, the operating system (OS) organizes the disk surface into circular tracks and divides each track into sectors. The OS creates a directory which will record the specific location of files. When you save a file, the OS moves the read/write head of the drive towards empty sectors, records the data and writes an entry for the directory. Later on, when you open that file, the OS looks for its entry in the directory, moves the read/write heads to the correct sector, and reads the file in the RAM area. However, formatting erases any existing files on a disk, so do not format disks on which data that you don't want to lose is stored.
The OS allows you to create one or more partitions on your hard drive, in effect dividing it into several logical parts. Partitions let you install more than one operating system (e.g. Windows and Linux) on your computer. You may also decide to split your hard drive because you want to store the OS and programs on one partition and your data files on another; this allows you to reinstall the OS when a problem occurs, without affecting the data partition.
The average time required for the read/ write heads to move and find data is called seek time (or access time) and it is measured in milliseconds (ms); most hard drives have a seek time of 7 to 14 ms. Don't confuse this with transfer rate - the average speed required to transmit data from the disk to the CPU, measured in megabytes per second.
How to protect your hard drive
Don't hit or move the computer while the hard drive is spinning. Hard drives are very sensitive to vibration and shocks, especially when they are operating; when the read/write head touches the rotating disk, it can scratch and damage the disk surface. This is known as head crash.
You shouldn't turn your computer off and on quickly. Wait at least ten seconds to ensure that the drive has stopped spinning.
Check your hard drive regularly for logical and physical errors. To check and repair a drive, you can use a disk diagnosis utility like Windows ScanDisk.
To minimize the risk of data loss or corruption, you should install an up-to-date virus scanner. You should also back up your hard drive regularly.


Optical discs and drives Optical discs can store data at much higher densities than magnetic disks. They are therefore ideal for multimedia applications where images, animation and sound occupy a lot of disc space. Furthermore, optical discs are not affected by magnetic fields, meaning that they are secure and stable, and can be transported through airport metal detectors without damaging the data. However, optical drives are slower than hard drives.
CDs and DVDs
At first sight, a DVD is similar to a CD. Both discs are 120 mm in diameter and 1.2 mm thick. They also both use a laser beam to read data. However, they are very different in internal structure and data capacity. In a DVD, the tracks are very close together, thus allowing more tracks. The pits in which data is stored are also smaller, so there are more pits per track. As a result, a CD can hold 650-700MB, whereas a basic DVD can hold 4.7GB. In addition, a DVD can be double-sided and dual layer, with a capacity of 17GB.
CDs come in three different formats:
CD-ROMs (read-only memory) are read-only units, meaning you cannot change the data stored on them (for example, a dictionary or a game).
CD-R (recordable) discs are write-once devices which let you duplicate music CDs and other data CDs.
CD-RW (rewritable) discs enable you to write onto them many times, just like a hard disk.
DVDs also come in several formats:
DVD-ROMs are used in DVD computer drives. They allow for data archiving as well as interactive content (for example, an encyclopedia or a movie).
DVD-R or DVD+R can only be recorded on once.
DVD-RW or DVD+RW discs can be erased and re- used many times, They are used to back up data files and to record audio and video.
The DVD drive used in computers is also called a DVD burner because it records information by burning via a laser to a blank DVD disc. However, a DVD recorder typically refers to a standalone unit which resembles a video cassette recorder. New DVD recorders can play all CD and DVD formats. There are also portable DVD players - handheld devices which let you watch movies or TV, play games and listen to music, wherever you are. They come with a built-in DVD drive and widescreen (rectangular 16:9 format) LCD display. They usually support multi-format playback - that is, they can play many file formats, including DVD-video, DivX, CD audio discs, MP3 music and JPEG images.
HD-DVD and Blu-ray discs
These two competing formats are expected to replace current DVD as the standard for watching movies at home. On one side are Toshiba, Microsoft and the DVD Forum, who support the High Definition-DVD (HD- DVD), Sony, Panasonic, Samsung, JVC and many movie studios are behind the Blu-ray format.
A Blu-ray disc has a capacity of 25GB (single layer), 50GB (dual layer) and 100GB (four layer). Unlike DVDs, which use a red laser to read and write data, Blu-ray uses a blue- violet laser, hence its name. Blu-ray discs can record and play back high-definition television and digital audio, as well as computer data.


Memory in a flash!
Flash memory is a type of non-volatile memory that can be electronically erased and reprogrammed. Its name was invented by Toshiba to express how much faster it could be erased - 'in a flash', which means 'very quickly.
Unlike RAM, which is volatile, flash memory retains the information stored in the chip when the power is turned off.This makes it ideal for use in digital cameras, laptops, network switches, video game 1 cards, mobile phones and portable multimedia players. In addition, it offers fast read access times (although not as fast as RAM), with transfer rates of 12MB per second. Unlike ROM chips, flash memory chips are rewritable, so you can update programs via software.
Inside the chip, data is stored in several floating gate transistors, called cells. Each cell traditionally stores one bit of data (1 = erased and 0 = programmed). New devices have a multi-level cell structure so they can store more that one bit per cell. The chips are constructed with either NOR or NAND gates. NOR chips function like a computer's main memory. while NAND works like a hard drive. For example, in a camera, NOR flash contains the camera's internal software, while NAND flash is used to store the images.
Flash memory is used in several ways:
Many PCs have their BIOS (basic input/output system) stored on a flash memory chip so it can be updated if necessary.
Modems use flash memory because it allows the manufacturer to support new protocols,
USB flash drives are used to save and move MP3s and other data files between computers. They are more easily transported than external hard drives because they use solid-state technology, meaning that they don't have fragile moving parts that can break if dropped. However, USB flash drives have less storage capacity than hard drives.
New U3 smart drives allow users to store both applications and data. They have two drive partitions and can carry applications that run on the host computer without requiring installation.
Flash memory cards are used to store images on cameras, to back up data on PDAs, to transfer games in video consoles, to record voice and music on MP3 players or to store movies on MP4 players. They are as small as a stamp, and capacity can range from 8MB to several gigabytes. The only limitation is that flash cards are often not interchangeable between devices. Some formats include: CompactFlash, Secure Digital, MultiMedia Card, miniSD card, and xD-Picture Card. Sony has its own product called the Memory Stick, used in its digital still cameras, video camcorders and the PlayStation Portable.The photos stored in a digital camera can be offloaded to a computer via cable or wirelessly. Another option is to have a flash card reader permanently connected to your PC; you simply eject the card from the camera and put it into the reader instead of having to plug the camera in.
The future of hard drives may be hybrid hard drives. Hybrid hard drives combine a magnetic hard disk and flash memory into one device.This allows computers to boot, or start, more quickly, and also reduces power consumption.
